.TH SYSCFG "1" "May 1, 2026" "syscfg 20260501" ""

.SH NAME
syscfg - declarative OS configuration

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsyscfg\fR
\fR[\fIoptions\fR]
[\fB--\fR]
\fIFILE\fR
\fR[\fIARG...\fR]

.PP
Options can be specified in any order.

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsyscfg\fR is a general-purpose system configuration utility that exposes a
powerful administration API for its clients to use. Clients are configuration
files that may contain de facto POSIX shell code to execute along with
the API.

Variable \fBCLIENT_NAME\fR, if not manually specified using
\fB-n\fR / \fB--client-name\fR, will be derived from the basename of the client.

.SH API
Certain API functions may reference and/or refer to documentation outside of
their scope. Refer to the documentation and/or source of \fBshell-glossary\fR.

.PP
\fB__action\fR - execute an action on an object on the filesystem
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
[\fBOBJ\fR]
.br
<\fBOBJ_PATH\fR>
.RE
Hints:
.RS
\fB-del\fR - delete \fBOBJ_PATH\fR
.br
\fB-no-sanit\fR - preserve \fBOBJ\fR and \fBOBJ_PATH\fR
.br
\fB-trunc\fR - truncate \fBOBJ_PATH\fR
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__bin_write\fR - write a binary (octal) file
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
<\fBOBJ\fR> - POSIX shell-compatible octal escape sequence(s) of the file
.br
<\fBOBJ_PATH\fR> - path to write the file at
.RE
Hints:
.RS
Refer to \fB__write\fR.
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__bin_write_ow_hard\fR - write a binary (octal) file (overwrite by deletion)
.RS
Refer to \fB__bin_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__bin_write_ow_soft\fR - write a binary (octal) file (in-place + atomic
overwrite)
.RS
Refer to \fB__bin_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__cmd\fR - perform a command
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.br
<\fB--\fR>
.br
<\fIcmd\fR>
.br
[\fIcmd_arg...\fR]
.RE
Hints:
.RS
\fB-out-save\fR - specify variable name to save &1 (stdout) to
.br
\fB-req-out\fR - empty &1 (stdout) is a fatal error condition
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__ed\fR - modify file data in-place according to format
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.br
<\fB--\fR>
.br
<\fIoperation...\fR>
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
<\fBOBJ\fR> - file data
.br
[\fBOBJ_PATH\fR] - file path to read if \fBOBJ\fR empty
.RE
Hints:
.RS
\fB-crc\fR - specify CRC32 string to assert the format against
.RS
\fBNote:\fR The format string will be asserted without any trailing <newline>
characters.
.RE
.br
\fB-log\fR - specify log file path for libfile()
.br
\fB-no-sanit\fR - preserve \fBOBJ_PATH\fR alongside \fBOBJ\fR
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__err\fR - print formatted text to stderr
.RS
Refer to \fBerr\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__file_write\fR - write a file
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
<\fBOBJ\fR> - file
.br
<\fBOBJ_PATH\fR> - path to write the file at
.RE
Hints:
.RS
Refer to \fB__write\fR.
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__file_write_ow_hard\fR - write a file (overwrite by deletion)
.RS
Refer to \fB__file_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__file_write_ow_soft\fR - write a file (in-place + atomic overwrite)
.RS
Refer to \fB__file_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__info\fR - print formatted text
.RS
Refer to \fBinfo\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_link\fR - symbolic link an object on the filesystem
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
<\fBOBJ\fR> - path
.br
<\fBOBJ_PATH\fR> - path to link the object at
.RE
Hints:
.RS
Refer to \fB__write\fR.
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_link_ow_hard\fR - symbolic link an object on the filesystem (overwrite
by deletion)
.RS
Refer to \fB__obj_link\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_link_ow_soft\fR - symbolic link an object on the filesystem
(in-place + atomic overwrite)
.RS
Refer to \fB__obj_link\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_write\fR - write (copy) an object on the filesystem
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Variables/Environment:
.RS
<\fBOBJ\fR> - path
.br
<\fBOBJ_PATH\fR> - path to copy the object at
.RE
Hints:
.RS
Refer to \fB__write\fR.
.RE
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_write_ow_hard\fR - write (copy) an object on the filesystem (overwrite
by deletion)
.RS
Refer to \fB__obj_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__obj_write_ow_soft\fR - write (copy) an object on the filesystem
(in-place + atomic overwrite)
.RS
Refer to \fB__obj_write\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB__write\fR - validate and perform a write
.RS
Parameters:
.RS
<\fItype\fR>
.RS
\fB-c\fR - filesystem copy
.br
\fB-l\fR - symbolic link
.br
\fB-o\fR - octal write
.br
\fB-w\fR - file write
.RE
<\fIstring/object\fR>
.br
<\fIpath to write/copy/link the object at\fR>
.br
<[\fIstate\fR]>
.RS
\fB-f\fR - hard overwrite (target is to be deleted)
.br
\fB-o\fR - soft overwrite (in-place + atomic)
.RE
[\fIhint...\fR]
.br
[\fIhint_arg...\fR]
.RE
Hints:
.RS
\fB-crc\fR - colorize the \fB-log\fR parse assuming fed() format
.br
\fB-gid\fR - specify GID to assert/set
.br
\fB-group\fR - specify group name to assert/set
.br
\fB-log\fR - specify file path for write statistics
.br
\fB-mode\fR - specify file mode in octal to assert/set
.br
\fB-no-avoid\fR - disable write avoidance
.br
\fB-no-sanit\fR - preserve \fBOBJ\fR and \fBOBJ_PATH\fR
.br
\fB-no-sync\fR - disable write synchronization
.br
\fB-sanit\fR - delete hint paths, unset \fBOBJ\fR and \fBOBJ_PATH\fR
.br
\fB-trunc\fR - truncate the path specified by \fB-log\fR
.br
\fB-uid\fR - specify UID to assert/set
.br
\fB-user\fR - specify user name to assert/set
.RE
.RE

.SH OPTIONS
.B -d, --disable-write-avoidance
.RS
Completely disable write avoidance functionality. \fBsyscfg\fR will not test
the target object for equivalence to avoid performing an artificial write,
and will instead always mark a write as valid.

\fBNote:\fR Individual write avoidance components can be turned off instead
to achieve a more "naive" write avoidance behavior.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-avoidance-group
.RS
Disable the write avoidance assert of group ownership.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-avoidance-perm
.RS
Disable the write avoidance assert of permissions (mode).
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-avoidance-type
.RS
Disable the write avoidance assert of object type.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-avoidance-type-attr
.RS
Disable the write avoidance assert of object type attributes.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-avoidance-user
.RS
Disable the write avoidance assert of user ownership.
.RE

.PP
.B -D, --disable-write-sync
.RS
Completely disable write synchronization functionality. \fBsyscfg\fR will not
test/perform inode equivalence for/on any specified target object properties,
and will instead proceed with its removal to ensure write integrity.

\fBNote:\fR Disabling this functionality invalidates in-place and atomic
overwrites.

\fBNote:\fR Individual write synchronization components can be turned off
instead to achieve a more lenient write integrity behavior. Disabling
individual components may invalidate in-place and/or atomic overwrites.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-sync-group
.RS
Disable the write synchronization for group ownership.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-sync-perm
.RS
Disable the write synchronization for permissions (mode).
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-sync-type
.RS
Disable the write synchronization for object type.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-sync-type-attr
.RS
Disable the write synchronization for object type attributes.
.RE

.PP
.B --disable-write-sync-user
.RS
Disable the write synchronization for user ownership.
.RE

.PP
\fB-n, --client-name\fR \fISTRING\fR
.RS
Specify the client name.
.RE

.PP
.B --no-color
.RS
Specify not to use ANSI color escape sequences. Variable \fBNO_COLOR\fR will be
set to a non-empty value.
.RE

.PP
\fB-o, --output\fR \fIPATH\fR
.RS
Specify a file path to write the client output to. If the file already exists,
execution will abort with exit status \fB1\fR.
.RE

.PP
\fB-p, --pager\fR \fINAME\fR
.RS
Specify a pager to use if required.
.RE

.PP
.B -S, --silent
.RS
Disable all syscfg output. Error and client-invoked output remain unaffected.
.RE

.PP
.B --silent-cmd
.RS
Disable command output.
.RE

.PP
.B --silent-cmd-info
.RS
Disable commands to be ran information.
.RE

.PP
.B --silent-write
.RS
Disable write content information.
.RE

.PP
.B --silent-write-avoidance
.RS
Disable write avoidance information.
.RE

.PP
.B --silent-write-stat
.RS
Disable write statistics information.
.RE

.PP
\fB-s, --source\fR \fIPATH\fR
.RS
Specify a file path to source. If the file does not exist, execution will abort
with exit status \fB1\fR.
.RE

.PP
.B --status-pager
.RS
Send the client output to a pager to inspect. \fBless\fR is the pager used by
default. The output will be piped.

\fBNote:\fR ANSI escape sequences in the client output are not accounted for.
.RE

.PP
.B -w, --write-always
.RS
Elevate to state "hard overwrite" all (soft) overwrites. A hard overwrite is
always valid and overwrites by deletion.

\fBNote:\fR This option only elevates all soft (and soft elevated) overwrites.
.RE

.PP
.B -W, --write-forced
.RS
Elevate to state "soft overwrite" all default (non-overwriting) writes. When
an overwrite is required, a soft overwrite is supposed to be an in-place,
atomic overwrite.

\fBNote:\fR Currently no writes are atomic, and some targets are not supported
for write avoidance and/or in-place overwrite. A soft overwrite will
automatically be elevated to hard overwrite when unsupported.
.RE

.PP
.B --help
.RS
Display help text and exit.
.RE

.PP
.B --version
.RS
Display version information and exit.
.RE

.SH EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.IP \fB0\fR
Success.
.IP \fB1\fR
General error.
.IP \fB2\fR
Usage error / ENOENT.
.IP \fB13\fR
EACCES.
.IP \fB17\fR
EEXIST.
.IP \fB255\fR
Bad API usage.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2021-2026 Dimitar Yurukov <mscalindt@protonmail.com>

.SH LICENSE
License KEYCLA: KEYCLA 1.0 License

.SH NOTICE
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

.SH AUTHOR
Dimitar Yurukov (mscalindt@protonmail.com)
